						December 2, 2001


Editor, AMS Notices

Dear Editor,

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), promoted by the music and
motion picture industries under the banner of protecting intellectual
property rights, was passed into law in July, 1998. Section
1201(b)(1)(A) of the DMCA prohibits trafficking in ``any
technology...that is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of
circumventing [copyright] protection''.  Unfortunately, the DMCA is
being used to discourage scientific research related to
encryption. With no stretch of the imagination, mathematics will be
directly and adversely affected, as the fields of computer security
and data encryption already are.

The names of Edward Felten and Dmitry Sklyarov are associated with
events of interest to mathematicians. As part of a public challenge
issued by the Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI), Felten's team
broke several ``watermarking'' technologies for digital music, then
rejected a monetary prize in favor of publication. The SDMI and the
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) warned Felten that
publication would ``subject [Felten's] team to enforcement actions
under the DMCA and possibly other federal laws.'' After negotiating
with the recording industry, Felten's team presented its results at
the 10th Annual USENIX Security Symposium, but the wording of
subsequent public announcements by the SDMI and RIAA leads us to
believe that the recording industry's seeming acquiescence represents
merely their perception of current public opinion.

The second case concerns a Russian software developer and cryptography
student named Dmitry Sklyarov. As an employee of the Russian software
firm ElcomSoft, Sklyarov authored a commercial program to circumvent
password protection on Adobe eBook files. This software is legal
outside the United States, and has legitimate applications that are
not provided by Adobe's own software.  Sklyarov was also an invited
speaker at the Def Con security conference held in Las Vegas in July,
2001. Acting on a motion filed by Adobe Software, the FBI arrested
Sklyarov on July 16, charging him with violating Section 1201(b)(1)(A)
of the DMCA. In response to strong negative public reaction, Adobe
dropped its complaint, but the Department of Justice is pursuing the
case. On August 30, Sklyarov was charged with five counts, each
carrying a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment and a fine of
$500,000.

Sklyarov's case is relevant to academics because he was in the United
States as a conference participant, not as a representative of
ElcomSoft. However, all such cases are important to research
mathematicians: Many commercial ``content protection technologies''
are currently at the level of Rot-13 (an involution of the Roman
alphabet), Fermat's little theorem, and mod 2 linear algebra, relying
on public ignorance for their effectiveness. To criminalize
publication of work that *could be used* to thwart such measures is
misguided. A mathematician whose work has cryptographic applications
could run afoul of the DMCA. We do not believe criminal charges would
be upheld in such a case, but find it unacceptable that the DMCA
contains provisions for raising these charges at all.

The chilling effect of the DMCA on academic research has not been
emphasized in media accounts, but it is extant, and will only get
worse as the entertainment industry pushes for more enforcement of the
DMCA. In July, Alan Cox (the maintainer of the stable Linux kernel)
stated that he would boycott conferences held in the United States,
and urged others to do the same. In August, Dutch cryptographer Neils
Ferguson (a co-designer of the Twofish encryption algorithm) announced
that he had broken the encryption used in Intel's High-bandwidth
Digital Content Protection (HDCP). Because he visits the United States
regularly, Ferguson has declined to discuss the details of his
findings, even to Intel, since that could constitute ``trafficking''
under the DMCA.

Readers can find up-to-date information on legal aspects of the
Sklyarov and Felten cases at the Electronic Frontier Foundation: 
http://www.eff.org

Technical and practical aspects of encryption are engagingly discussed
at David Touretzky's Carnegie-Mellon University site. His gallery of
DVD descramblers pointedly illustrates the fact that source code---a
form of mathematical expression---is speech that should be protected
by the First Amendment.
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dst

Two undergraduates broke the weak encryption used by Mattel's "Cyber
Patrol 4" Internet blocking software. They detail their methods, and
what they found, in this article:
http://tcn.dhs.org/mirrors/cp4break/cp4break.htm
It is excellent reading, at a level suitable for an undergraduate
algebra class.

			Sincerely yours,

			George Avrunin, UMass Amherst
			Anders Buch, MIT
			Andrew D. Hwang, College of the Holy Cross
			Frank Sottile, UMass Amherst
