 

_______________________________________________________________
AMS Special Sessions

By Curtis Bennett           and       Frank Sottile
   Dept of Math			      Dept. of Math.
   Bowling Green State U	      University of Wisconsin
   Bowling Green, OH		      Madison, WIS 57306
   cbennet@bgnet.bgsu.edu	      sottiile@math.wisc.edu


Originally appeared as Item # 4 in 

            *Concerns of Young Mathematicians*
                    Volume 3, Issue 35
                       Nov. 15, 1995


Last spring there was some discussion amongst the YMN Board concerning AMS
special sessions and how speakers are chosen. The purpose of this article is
to summarize this discussion and address the questions raised. The main
views expressed are those of the authors and should not be assigned to the
whole administrative board. Much of the information included below is in the
Manual for Organizing Special Sessions sent out by the AMS to organizers of
special sessions.

Sessions at AMS Meetings

The scientific program at AMS meetings has several components, typically
invited addresses, special sessions, and contributed paper sessions. There
is a real distinction between special sessions and contributed paper
sessions.  Every AMS member has the right to present a report of their
research at AMS meetings, with obvious controls (no proofs that the Earth is
flat). The contributed paper sessions provide such a forum. In a contributed
paper session consisting of ten-minute talks (humorously referred to as
speedmath sessions), such presentations are grouped together under the title
of some subdiscipline of mathematics, e.g., Functional Analysis or Graph
Theory and Combinatorics.

We contrast these sessions with the special sessions, which are often
organized around the invited addresses, the speakers are invited or at least
their talks are refereed, and usually have a rather tight focus.

How are special session topics and organizers chosen?

Special sessions are essentially small research conferences that are
piggybacked onto the AMS meetings. Sessions are usually organized around a
single topic, often related to one of the invited addresses.

    Anyone can propose to organize a special session at an AMS meeting.
Deadlines and other such details are published in the Notices. Theoretically
the selection of the organizers (or chairpersons) and the topics of special
sessions is the responsibility of the Committee to Select Hour Speakers (of
the AMS) for the meeting in question. In practice, however, the job is done
by the associate secretary in charge of the meeting. If volunteers come
forward, usually the secretary is quite happy to draft them.

According to one associate secretary, special sessions at section meetings
are pretty much guaranteed to be accepted unless there is a conflict with an
existing session. Furthermore it is not necessary to stick to oneUs own
geographical section either. The January meetings, on the other hand, are a
little more selective about special sessions. This is in part because there
are far more proposals for special sessions and in part because of practical
concerns about the number of sessions the meetings can accommodate.

Organizing a session can be a valuable experience and a pain in the neck. In
many respects it is easier than organizing a one-day or weekend conference;
many details such as room availability, advertising, and the special needs
of participants are done by the AMS staff. Also, since the AMS schedule
calls for early organization, there are often few(er) last minute details
which demand your attention. This means that the organizer can manage to
attend most talks, often an impossibility at other conferences. Also, while
there is no travel money to offer speakers, most mathematicians are aware of
this and even though the meeting may be off of the beaten track, many will
try and attend anyway.

Some of the headaches of organizing a session concern making sure the
speakers turn in their abstracts on time. Since the AMS requires abstracts
about two and a half months in advance of the meeting and many speakers can
only guess what results they may have to talk about that far ahead, many
speakers will wait until the last moment to submit an abstract. As
organizer, the job falls to you to remind speakers about the due dates for
their abstracts.

Another duty that falls to the organizer is choosing speakers and answering
requests to be included in the conference. The positive side is that you can
be sure that the people you really want to have speak get invited. On the
other hand, you may find that there are more people that you want to invite
(or who want to speak) than there are time slots. This can be kind of
uncomfortable, although almost everybody is extremely understanding about
this.

How are special session speakers selected?

The AMS Manual for Organizers lists five basic ways in which papers are
selected.

1) The speaker is invited by the organizer 
2) The speaker volunteers by submitting an abstract three weeks earlier
   than the final abstract deadline and requesting that it be considered by
   the organizer for inclusion in the session 
3) The speaker volunteers by writing directly to the organizer 
4) The organizer asks to see all abstracts with a given two-digit
   classification number and selects certain ones for the special session 
5) After receiving all the abstracts, the associate secretary suggests by phone
   to the organizer that he or she might wish to include one or two
   particularly appropriate papers in his or her session. 

According to the AMS Manual, about 80% of the papers selected at all special
sessions are chosen by method (1). About 5% of the papers are selected by
each of the other methods. In fact it is not unusual for special session
organizers to know exactly who they want before the session is even
announced.

Some of the editors of Concerns have found (3) to be a useful route to
getting invited, when used in moderation. It is perfectly reasonable for the
organizer to tell a volunteer that there is no room for them. It is also
possible for the organizer to find themselves in a place where they will
happily consider volunteers once they have heard back from several of the
invitees. Often an organizer will invite people with the expectation that
some will say no.  Then, after a first wave, they may have more people to
invite or they may wait to see who sees the announcement and wants to
attend. If you are still a graduate student or if you only recently received
your degree, you may wish to ask your advisor to approach the organizers.

In general we would always recommend getting in touch with the organizers if
you are interested in talking. Unfortunately organizers will also have to
say no occasionally because your talk wonUt really fit the session or
because of time constraints. Ideally the speakers at a session will span
several mathematical generations, and even if you are unable to speak, there
is a great deal to be gained by attending a special session in a field you
are interested in. After all, the point of the meeting and the session is to
bring people together to discuss mathematics.

Some caveats about special sessions: For some reason (perhaps cultural) some
fields of mathematics rarely have special sessions at AMS meetings. Other
fields utilize this vehicle for many of their meetings. For this reason, the
information in this article might not be as useful for some. The AMS is
frequently looking for organizers of special sessions. So if you want to see
a special session in your area, you should consider organizing one.
