Getting Started in Research

Frank Sottile <sottile@msri.org>

How do you get started on research, post-Ph.D.?  That is, how do you make
the transition from graduate student to a budding research mathematician?
Specifically, how do you go from working on a problem for several years with
their advisor's attention and counsel, to independently seeking out and
solving your own problems?  Anecdotal evidence and advice I have been given
point to this being a critical transition, one which many (most?) young
mathematicians do not make.

I don't really have the answer.  Mathematical research is a very personal
pursuit, and what works for one may not work for another.  However, I think
I have made that transition, and I have thought a lot about it and have some
observations, which I share here.  I will refer to events in my career, and
so this won't apply to everyone, but hopefully it will either stimulate
discussion, or help someone.

I managed to prove a new result within two months of starting my first job.
I feel that I was fortunate to get so quickly started in new directions, but
also that it was absolutely necessary; you can't go very far extending your
thesis or living off ideas that your advisor sends your way.  The key is to
generate your own ideas.  This may seem rather daunting.  One way to do this
is to attend lots of talks and conferences and talk mathematics with as many
different people as possible. I also 
recommend casting a wide net for potential problems; not only are you more
likely to find something to your liking, but you will learn more along the
way.  You don't have to work on problems similar to your thesis for the rest
of your career.

That said, you should publish the main results from your thesis.  I didn't
do this for about a year, and the delay later cost me a lot of time.
Instead, I moved to a new city and got settled in.  I had heard of people
who moved, got settled in, then their first term started and they got caught
up in their new responsibilities.  After a couple of terms of that, they
hadn't done any research and found it difficult to get started.

To avoid this, as soon as I arrived in my new city, I started to think about
two ideas I had earlier in my graduate career, but unrelated to my thesis.
They were vague, and I didn't get too far on them.  One was cut short by the
appearance of a manuscript - by someone I had innocently talked to the
previous spring.  I still think the other is interesting, but school quickly
started, and by the time I had the time again, I had other ideas.

The first week of any academic term is a week to organize your classes and
schedule and see your colleagues after a break. It doesn't seem to be a good
time to try to get any research done.  If this is a new job, then there is a
lot more dislocation: adjusting to new responsibilities, a new town, new
department, and new people.   It took me several weeks before I was able to
do much else, and by then I had other responsibilities: I was scheduled to
give a seminar at my home institution, and then speak at a regional
conference the next weekend.

Giving and attending talks is an important component of my research
activity.  I use talks, particularly at my home institution, to help me
organize my ideas or cast them in a new light.  It is a challenge to present
a coherent explanation of your work in any format.  The choices of what and
how to present the material is always leads to improvements in how I think
about them, which shortens proofs and suggests new avenues to explore.
Giving a talk introduces you to your audience, and such introductions lead
to worthwhile interactions.  This is also a reason to attend seminars,
colloquiua and to travel to conferences. I recommend footing the bill for
some travel yourself if no outside support is available.  After all,
this is a vital part of the mathematical enterprise.

Another responsibility was a grant application, which turned out to be one
of the better uses of my time.  In a grant application, you must convince
other mathematicians that your good ideas are worth supporting.  The
exercise of writing one forces you to do overcome a big post-Ph.D. stumbling
block: generate new ideas of what to work on.  Along with introspectively
trying to describe what I was interested in, its value, and what I might
want to do next, I contacted several people at other institutions and
started a dialogue. I have recently written two joint papers with people I
first contacted at that time, almost 30 months ago.  The value of those
contacts isn't these recent papers, but how they helped my thinking about
mathematics to evolve.

How do you make contacts with others when you are a fresh Ph.D?  I already
mentioned giving talks and attending conferences.  When I travel, or when
the department has visitors, I socialize and ask people questions that come
to mind.  It is easiest to get to know people who live nearby.  I knew one
of my coauthors from his papers, and met him when I learned that he had also
just moved to the same town.


One way I have met other mathematicians is by distributing copies of my
papers.  When I complete a manuscript and get ready to send it to a journal,
I also make a list of other mathematicians who may be interested in these
results, and then I send them copies with a cover letter describing the main
results and sometimes pointing them to parts of the paper which may interest
them.  This list is generated by people whose papers I have read or cited,
people who I have heard speak or heard about, people who have asked me for
copies of my work, and my local colleagues.  I am not shy about this; at
worst, they won't read my paper.  I also put my papers on electronic
preprint servers, and plan to eventually post them on a web page.  I have
met several people this way, some of whom have had me visit or give a talk
and one with whom I just wrote a paper.

When writing that grant application, one of the people I contacted pointed
me to a conjecture (in algebra) in one of her papers that I added to my
mental list of problems worth thinking about.  After finishing the grant
application, I hadn't done any new work in the several months since I handed
in my dissertation.  Rather than get started, I traveled to the Midwest to
give a seminar, visit a friend, and attend a weekend conference.  While
there, I had a flash of insight one morning in the shower (really!).  I
realized how it should be possible to prove the afore-mentioned conjecture
using geometry.

Generating ideas is necessary, but then you need to bring them to fruition.
Research, like other quality pursuits, requires time and dedication.
Discipline may be the most important part of my doing mathematics.  I impose
deadlines on myself, reserve time solely for research, and try to use my
time efficiently.  In short, hard, dedicated work is essential.
I jealously guard my research time; otherwise it evaporates as there are
many other demands on my time.

When I returned home after that trip.  I arranged my schedule to give myself
some uninterrupted blocks of time.  This was a matter of changing when I did
my class preparation and other necessary tasks (email, meeting with my TA's,
grading homework, lunch, etc.)  so that I would have these periods.  Then I
used this time to try and prove this conjecture.  After a very dedicated few
weeks, I did it.  After a couple of hours of euphoria, I began the hard part
- writing up this result and obvious extensions.  I am not kidding, I find
that I spend more time writing than research, and it is not nearly as fun.
It is absolutely necessary to do so - if my papers are not carefully written
and if I do not make every effort to improve the exposition and clean up the
arguments, then few will read my papers.  Remember, your readership is a
monotone decreasing function of line number.

While writing this result up, I started to work with a coauthor on a further
extension, which would have been a fantastic result.  After six months of my
doing nothing else, we gave up.  This failure to get results is quite
common, a lot of promising lines of my research fizzle out, or else I cannot
solve them.  Don't let this keep you from trying.  When working on a
problem, you inevitably learn some new mathematics or get some ideas, or
obtain partial results.

Partial results are not necessarily second-class; the problem might be
harder than you thought.  If the partial results are interesting and lead
somewhere, then they are publishable.  Only last summer, my coauthor and I
came back to this work and write a paper whose genesis was the successes we
had among our many failures.  I now think this paper is the best I have
written, and we have several more in planning.  While we have yet to solve
the problem we set out to do, this work has my most interesting line of
research.

During the last half of that first year, I did other things, as well; I gave
several talks and attended an instructional conference in an area that I am
only now just beginning to work in.  There I met someone who was very
enthusiastic about my thesis and gave me the encouragement I needed to write
it up, and who has now become a very important mentor.  I also met a student
there whose research gave me an idea of an application of some geometric
constructions I had been thinking about.  This helped me complete those
constructions and write them up, and now we are writing a joint paper on
those applications.

At the end of my first year out, while I had failed even to massage my
thesis into a preprint and had only solved one new problem, I think that I
was on the right track.  I had made serious work a regular habit, I was in
regular contact with a number of other mathematicians, and I was thinking
about a number of different problems.
