Frank Sottile

Report on Activities:  1 January -- 15 June 2004

  One  of  my main  activities  in this  period  was  chairing the  organizing
committee of  the Winter 2004  program at thet Mathematical  Sciences Research
Institute on the "Topological Aspects of Real Algebraic Geometry".  Some of my
more specific  duties for the program  were to help  organize the Introductory
Workshop (12-16 January  2004), a weekend workshop on  Real Algebraic Geometry
and  Geometric  Modeling  (3-4   April),  and  the  Workshop  on  Algorithmic,
Combinatorial, and Applicable Real Algebraic  Geometry (12-16 April).  I was a
mentor for  the MSRI  postdoc Seongchun  Kwon and also  for Frederic  Bihan, a
postdoc whom I supported on  a grant.  Other activities included co-organizing
a  special session  on  algebraic geometry  at  the Joint  AMS-SMM meeting  in
Houston (13-15  May), as well as planning  for two other meetings  that I also
co-organized---a Banff International Research Station meeting on Combinatorial
Hopf Algebras (28  August-2 September 2004) and an AMS  special session on the
Modern Schubert Calculus at the  Evanston AMS meeting (23-24 October 2004).  I
also served on  the program committee for the  16th Internatinal Conference on
Formal Power Series  and Algebraic Combinatorics in Vancouver  (28 June-2 July
2004).   Finally, I was  also a  member of  the editorial  board for  the SIAM
Journal on Discrete Mathematics.

  My research program included many  collaborations; I discuss those for which
substantial work  was done  during this period.   The bibliography at  the end
lists all  papers and  projects that were  worked on (including  revisions for
publication and  initial research) while  I was a Clay  Mathematical Institute
Research Scholar.

   With  co-organizer Vicki  Powers, MSRI  member Claus  Scheiderer  and Bruce
Reznick, we  wrote a  paper "A  New Approach to  Hilbert's Theorem  on Ternary
Quartics",  which  will appear  in  the  Comptes  Rendus Academy  of  Sciences
(Paris).   Here,  we strengthen  Hilbert's  theorem,  showing  that a  postive
ternary quartic is a sum of three squares in exactly eight inequivalent ways.

   A major focus  of my work concerned real  solutions to polynomial equations
and  geometric problems.   With Evgenia  Soprunova, we  largely wrote  a paper
"Lower  Bounds for  Real Solutions  to  Sparse Polynomial  Systems", which  we
completed in  the Summer of  2004.  This gives  lower bounds on the  number of
real solutions  to some  sparse polynomial systems.   With the  Postdoc Benoit
Bertrand and my  visitor and MSRI member Frederic Bihan,  we started a project
to give upper bounds to some sparse polynomial systems which are significantly
lower than the  Khovanski or Kouchnirenko bounds.  This will  soon result in a
paper  "Polynomial systems with  few real  zeroes".  With  Soprunova, graduate
student (and MSRI visitor) Jim Ruffo,  we used MSRI computers to complete most
of the  experimentation (12 gigaHertz years)  on a project  to investigate the
Schubert calculus on a flag  manifold, numerically.  The paper describing this
project is currently being written,  and will be entitled "Experimentation and
conjectures in the real Schubert calculus".

   Another paper  recently completed was "Cremona  Convexity, Frame Convexity,
and  a  Theorem  of  Santal\'o".   This  applied  classical  constructions  in
algebraic geometry to  unbderstand notions of convexity for  lines in n-space.
This was a direct result of  the environment at MSRI, involving Jacob Goodman,
who co-organized  the Autumn program  on Discrete and  Computational geometry,
Autumn MSRI  member Andreas Holmsen, year-long MSRI  member Kristian Ranestad,
and Ricky  Pollack, who visited MSRI for  parts of both the  Autumn and Spring
programs.

    Marcelo Aguiar and  I completed two papers on  combinatorial Hopf algebras
that we  had begun in 2003,  "Cocommutative Hopf algebras  of permutations and
trees",  and "Structure of  the Loday-Ronco  Hopf algebra  of trees".   I also
completed  two papers  in  the  combinatorics of  the  Schubert calculus  with
Cristian Lenart, "Grothendieck Polynomials via Permutation Patterns and chains
in the  Bruhat Order"  and "A Pieri-type  formula for  the K-theory of  a flag
manifold", the first paper was also with Shawn Robinson.
  
   I started and worked extensively on  two other projects also while at MSRI,
but these  are further  from completion.  One,  with (then)  Berkeley graduate
student  Kevin  Purbhoo,  establishes  Horn-type  inequalities  for  so-called
minuscule  flag  varieties;  these   extend  the  Horn  inequalities  for  the
Littlewood-Richardson  numbers to  this other  setting.  The  other,  with Tom
Braden  and Linda  Chen, has  resulted in  a presentation  of  the equivariant
cohomology ring of the Quot scheme for the Grassmannian.


Bibliography

Accepted Papers

* Structure  of the  Malvenuto-Reutenauer Hopf  algebra of  permutations, with
    Marcelo Aguiar.  Advances in Mathematics, to appear.

* Real  k-flats   tangent  to  quadrics   in  R^n,  with   Thorsten  Theobald.
    Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., to appear.

* A  New Approach  to Hilbert's  Theorem  on Ternary  Quartics, with  Victoria
    Powers, Bruce  Reznick, and Claus  Scheiderer, Comptes Rendus  (Paris), to
    appear.

Papers in Review

* Cocommutative Hopf algebras of permutations and trees, with Marcelo Aguiar.

* Grothendieck Polynomials  via Permutation Patterns and chains  in the Bruhat
    Order, with Cristian Lenart and Shawn Robinson.

* A  Pieri-type formula for  the K-theory  of a  flag manifold,  with Cristian
    Lenart.

* Structure of the Loday-Ronco Hopf algebra of trees, with Marcelo Aguiar.

* Cremona Convexity, Frame  Convexity, and a Theorem of  Santal\'o, with Jacob
    E. Goodman, Andreas Holmsen, Richard Pollack, and Kristian Ranestad.

* Lower Bounds for  Real Solutions to Sparse Polynomial  Systems, with Evgenia
    Soprunova.

Manuscripts in Progress 

* Polynomial systems with  few real zeroes, with Benoit  Bertrand and Frederic
    Bihan.

* Lines  Tangent  to  Four   Triangles,  with  Herv\'e  Br\"onnimann,  Olivier
    Devillers, and Sylvain Lazard.

* Experimentation  and conjectures  in  the real  Schubert  calculus for  flag
    manifolds, with Jim Ruffo, Yuval Sivan, and Evgenia Soprunova.

* The recursive nature of minuscule Schubert calculus, with Kevin Purbhoo.

* Equivariant cohomology of the quot scheme, with Tom Braden and Linda Chen.

* Conic decompositions  of polytopes, with  Matthias Beck, Sinai  Robbins, and
   Jonathan Weitsman.

