
               *Concerns of Young Mathematicians*
                       Volume 2  Issue 26
                         August 17, 1994

Item #6  Curtis Bennett    Employment Survey Results, Part 1

I have finally completed tallying the results of the employment survey I
conducted through the Concerns from 5/10 - 6/30.  In this article I will
include the raw data concerning how many applicants had found positions
when they responded and what type of positions they were.  Additionally, I
will include the spectrum of the number of applications sent out by
individuals.  Below the data, I will then discuss the results.  Later
articles will discuss comments that people made and perhaps analyze other
parts of the data that was collected.

Survey Results

                Grad Students           Post Graduate                   total
Responses            41                      48                           89

Found a position     29                      38                           67

Type of pos.
tenure track         11                      18                           29
2+ year               7                       6                           13
1 year                9                      13                           22
other                 2                       1                            3

#of applications  found job   didn't       found job     didn't
0-30                  6         2              4            4             16
31-60                 3         2             15            3             23
61-90                 7         3             13            1             24
91-120                9         5              2            0             16
121-175               3         0              1            1              5
175 -                 1         0              3            1              5

mercy position received                                     1

In tabulating the data, I tried to stay fairly close to what people
reported of themselves.  Occassionally this may have caused me to put
responses in the wrong category.  Also, it was unclear with me what I
should do with so-called "mercy positions" (ie. those positions given by
the host institution to graduates who don't find jobs or extensions of jobs
by working around the bureaucratic system).

The 1-year position numbers are a little off because if someone had a
1-year position AND a two year position for afterwards (as is not uncommon
for people going to MSRI (Math Science Research Institute) or IAS (the
Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton) I put these people into the 2+
year category.  Also, some 1-year positions are renewable and some are not.
 As it was, I was unable to differentiate on all responses.

Another comment concerns the peopl who sent out very few applications.
Many (but not all) of these people were involved in 2-body problems or had
other reasons for restricting the search.

Of course, this survey is completely unscientific, and probably should not
be used to make sweeping generalizations.  There are two items that
probably will shift the data in opposite ways.  First, offers are still
occassionally being made.  As a result, some of those who didn't find a job
probably now have one (be it only a mercy position).  Second, people were
probably more likely to respond if they had received an offer.
Particularly if they were still waiting on a couple of letters or phone
calls.

That being said, I found the numbers surprisingly bleak.  To see that
roughly one fourth of the respondents didn't have any offers (even of
1-year positions) by mid-may was discouraging.  Particularly, as I expect
that people without offers were less likely to respond.  I also was
concerned that roughly one third of the offers that had been made by late
May were 1-year positions.   I hope that the picture is this bleak only
because of the early nature of the survey and its lack of random sampling,
but I am afraid that is not the case.

While the AMS studies usually show fuller employment than this study, there
have been questions raised about the AMS study.  First, if you get a mercy
position at your graduate institution, it usually counts as employment at a
Type I school in the study.  Second, the AMS study does not count graduate
students who extend their graduate study a year.  Finally, the AMS study
only counts graduate students and does not figure in the postgraduate
applicants.

I would like to see the AMS or the JCEO do a new study in addition to the
current study and the long term study that will soon be coming out.  I
would like to see the AMS take a "generic" university (or maybe a random
sampling of universities) and talk to all of the people who applied to that
school (or a random sample of the applicants) and see what happened to
those applicants.  This certainly will not be a good random sample
(although the parenthetical might), but it should give a clearer picture of
who is applying for positions, and how those people are doing.

Curtis Bennett
cbennet@andy.bgsu.edu
