
            *Concerns of Young Mathematicians*
                    Volume 3,  Issue 18
                       May 24, 1995
 
_______________________________________________________________
Item #7   
             YMN 1995 Job Survey (revisited)

There have been 59 responses to the survey which ran in the last 
issue.    While that number is too small for any really meaningful
conclusions to be drawn, it has yielded some interesting anecdotes
(see other article in this issue), as well as the following hastily
compiled raw data:

59 Respondents; 

Their job status (for next year, as of survey):

23    have tenure track positions
3     have jobs in industry/business
9     have postdoctoral positions
7     have temporary positions
1     has a part time job (offered and accepted in late Feb!)
16    have yet to hear anything

Of those without permanent positions

1     has a three year position
9     have a two year position
6     have one year positions
1     was indeterminant


Hopefully, I will get a flood of additional responses (I think that I
will need around 100 total to say anything meaningful) soon, so that we
can run an article in Concerns with a more detailed report.   I want to
thank all who responded, and ask anyone who has yet to do so to please
send in a survey.   Anyone should feel free to forward copies to their 
friends.   Below is a copy of the survey.


-Frank Sottile
sottile@math.toronto.edu

Item #8   
                      News from the (Job) Front
      

In the last issue, I invited readers to fill out a survey asking 
for reader input about their job searches this year.   While I am 
still compiling the statistics (A daunting task!), I have included 
some anecdotes that were sent to me about how people were fairing at
various institutions.   I have roughly grouped the responses by Group
(a technical classification that the AMS use in its job statistics), and 
by US geographic region.  The remarks may have been slightly edited,
in part to keep the institutions anonymous.   Within each quotation 
("...") only one institution is discussed. 

-Frank Sottile
sottile@math.toronto.edu


Group I

West

"Out of 42 students looking for jobs, including 3 who did not get jobs 
last year, I believe that at least 15 have jobs now,
perhaps as many as 20-25.  (I can think of 11).  Not everyone is
seeking a job just yet, nor is everyone looking in academics.

It is perhaps accurate to say  `Of the academic job seekers in our 
graduating class, a significant fraction, perhaps as high as one-half, 
does not yet have a position'"


"As far as I know, at least seven students who are graduating this year 
have jobs.  A professor has said that  this is the worst year in his memory."


"I think we have 11 graduating PhD's:
 1 has a tenure track position 
 7 have postdocs/ instructorships 
 2 have nothing so far
 1 I have no idea what's up.
   We also have a person who got his PhD last year and stayed on as
   a visiting instructor. He is leaving academia.
   Finally, one student decided to defer graduation one year.

Midwest

  "Most graduating students (7) had jobs, as of 6 March"

  "As of yesterday, none of this year's crop of math PhDs has a job 
   for next year."

  "I know of 8 people graduating with Ph.D.s from my department this year. 
   Of those 8, one is retaining his permanent job at a local community 
   college.  Only 2 have had even an interview, and no one has an offer yet"

  "Three students in Algebra and Number theory have all had more than one 
   offer each."

   "Of the graduate students here, two have gotten jobs."


  "We have 7 new PhD's. One has tenure track position, and two have one year
positions. Two are returning to Italy. The other two international 
students (Chinese) are seeking employment, but have not found jobs. 

   We also have 8 people leaving with Master's this year, 3 are going 
to new schools, 4 of the others have jobs in business, and one is looking
for work teaching High school"


East 

"6 students leaving or graduating; 3 have jobs in business, one is
leaving w/o a PhD, 2 not looking for jobs, and one is looking without
success.  2 students have been looking since last year, both without
success."

"There are several post docs at the lab where I work in stochastic
processes and signal processing.  Only 2 out of 6 have obtained
permanent jobs after several years of searching."

"There are about 19 people from here on the market this year, either
new graduates or people who graduated last year and stayed around for a
year. Of those, 13 have jobs. Two that I know of have non-academic
positions. 3 have temporary positions and the others I don't know
about."

"I think most people here got jobs (not including instructorships in
our department) the first year they applied; all but one of the rest
got jobs the second year.

`My impression is that this year is better (by epsilon) than last.'"


"In the past year,  3 students have completed their Ph.D.  One is
returning to their home country, one has an oil industry post-doc, and
one has had no responses.

This year, 5 grad students are leaving the program without completing
their degrees.

No one in the class that "should" be graduating this spring will finish
- one is leaving for computer science, 3 will extend into a 6th year."


Group II

West

"As of now,  1 grad has a tenure-track job, out of 6 who were applying."

"There are 7 graduate students  coming out, 5 of which have jobs in
academia or business.   Of the 2 academics, both have tenure-track
jobs."

"Of 3 graduates this year, none has a job yet.
Of 2 graduates of last year that were on contract here the past  
year, each has interviews coming up."

"There are 4 of us completing our PhD's in the dept. of pure math.
One student returned to Australia.  2 have tenure track offers,
and the last is currently unemployed, but will be interviewing next 
month for a temporary position.

Another student who finished LAST year (1993-1994) was also on the job
market since she was in a temporary position this year.  She has
accepted another temporary position for next fall."

 "Of 7 graduating PhD's in my department 5 got a position, 2 are still 
  looking. Moreover, 2 people who graduated last year managed to get a
  position this time. Of those 7 who found a position,
   2 got a permanent job in industry
   3 got a tenure-track positions in a College or a small University
   2 got a post-doc."
 

Midwest

 "I hear that 3 grads have tenure-track jobs so far."

 "One guy who looked last year and got nothing landed a job at 
  a small Jesuit college.  From all I've heard, no one else is 
  even looking this year, in light of the difficult year four 
  of us had last year."

East 

  "Out of 7 PhD's who graduated last year (1994), 2 are in tenure track 
   positions, one is going to a second one year position, 3 are currently 
   unemployed for next year and one is in industry.

   Of the 3 graduating PhD's this year, one will be in industry, one 
   has a tenure track job and the other is still looking."

  "Of 4 who graduated with me in 1993, 2 have jobs and 
   2 are unemployed"
 
  "Both graduating students here have tenure-track positions 
   for the fall."



  "Two years ago all but one graduate from our school got 
   tenure track offers.

   Last year 1 got a tenure track position, 2 got temporary positions at
   other schools, 1 person was given a one year position at our school,
   and one person did temp work for 9 months before being hired
   statistical programming.

   This year we have 3 people with one interview each, no offers as yet,
   and several people without even an interview.  At this time last 
   year two people had found jobs, one temporary the other tenure track.

   Two years ago all but two people had tenure track jobs at this point."


Other


   "Of the 4 post-docs here from the US who wished to return to 
    there this year, NONE received offers in the US."

   "Of the two grad students that I know about at the institution 
   that I am now at, one got two tenure track offers at small 
   high-teaching load schools; one got nothing. There is another visiting 
   professor here who has about 15 years experience and about 40 papers;
   he applied to about 120 places and got no offers."
