
           *Concerns of Young Mathematicians*
                    Volume 3,  Issue 29 
                       Oct. 4, 1995
 
_____________________________________________________________________
Item #4  Comments From the 1995 CoYM Employment Survey
              Compiled by Frank Sottile
              sottile@math.toronto.edu


Last May, we ran an informal survey of asking our readers who were on the 
job market last year to share their experiences with us.  Earlier, we 
published two articles; one consisting of anecdotes about how others
were faring at their institutions, and one containing a compilation of
the responses.   In this article, I have included a selection of the 
additional comments made by the respondents to the survey.  I have loosely
grouped these comments together and different comments are separated by
blank lines.  


(*)  I ended the survey with what seemed to me to be a joke:
 "...one is leaving mathematics for divinity school"
but the joke was on me:

 That was me - accepted at a seminary in Philly -  until I got the 11th
 hour offers!

 Actually I once was in a seminary, and it's not so bad.



(*)  The more serious comments follow:

   If someone really wants a job, there may be community colleges around in 
 one's area.    Granted, you don't need a ph.D. for these, but some of them 
 pay rather well--sometimes better than major universities.

   In spite of the success I had, I think that the job market is worse now 
 than 2 years ago.  I think I was successful for all of the following reasons:
    1. Well-written resume and cover letter.
    2. Teaching experience beyond graduate school at a first-rate
        teaching school with good letters to back this up.
    3. My research area(s) are applied.
    4. I believe that being female helps get you noticed (but
        I don't think it helps you to get the job.)

   Judging from my experience, it is possible to spend 4 years at a liberal
 arts college that doesn't emphasise research as much as I would like and then
 move on to a tenure track job at a much better liberal arts school where
 research matters.  
 I suspect that being female helped me, but probably only at the last stage 
 of the game.  I've been told that it works as a tie breaker at the place to 
 which I am going.

   I didn't look hard for the job I got.    I talked to a few people who asked 
 for my resume and then invited me for interviews. Everything up to the 
 interview stage was casual. My point is, NETWORKING is vital to private 
 sector employment, and most grads don't seem to understand that.

  I believe my success on the job market was due in part to several factors:
    1. Well defined goals and a carefully selected list of colleges to apply
        that seemed well matched to my goals/interests.
    2. Strong publishing record, albeit mostly in conference proceedings.
    3. Unusual background:  I worked in industry as a research and design 
        software engineer, and taught high school before attending graduate 
        school.
    4. An advisor who went to great lengths to prepare me to be competitive
        on the job market (encouraging me to give talks at conferences, 
        financially supporting me at conferences, and nominating me for 
        various awards).

   People ought to be encouraged to apply more outside the U.S.  There seem to 
 be a lot of temporary positions available in Europe.   Most opportunities 
 never get advertised because postdocs are often funded by someone's personal 
 grant. I have received offers for postdocs simply by writing to well-known 
 European professors in my field whom I knew only through reading their papers.
 The availability of permanent positions varies from country to country.
 In most countries a large part of the scientific life is conducted in English
 so language should not be automatically assumed a barrier. 

   One of my on-site interviews was in the U.K., where interviews seem to 
 be handled quite differently from North America.  All candidates visit 
 on the same day and are questioned by a committee that makes an offer 
 within a day or so of the interviews (candidates are expected to say 
 yes or no equally promptly).

   So here's what I am seeing [at my institution].  A significant number of 
 grad students are leaving school with master's degrees.  For those staying in 
 grad school, it seems to be taking longer to finish.  And when they do 
 finish, the new PhDs are finding employment outside academics.  
   All this in a department where significant education reform projects 
 are underway which could translate into attractive job candidates for 
 colleges and universities that emphasize teaching.  

    I have heard this story repeatedly.  A university will fly some candidates
 out to interview.  None accept the position and then the university is 
 forced either to not hire or has a very difficult time flying out other
 candidates.  This would not be an issue except I have heard that some  
 interviewees admit during the interview that the have already accepted 
 another offer.  To interview at a place that one is not seriously 
 considering (given they have an alternative) is not reasonable behaviour. 
  
   The only reason I received an interview (I made the short list) at
 one of the schools I applied to was simply because I knew someone
 there. The same was true for my competitor. 
   Neither of us got the job. Due to irregularities in the
 selection procedure by the hiring committee, the tenure-track positions
 which the school had advertised (4 in total) all were withdrawn.

   The job market is in worse shape than is being portrayed by the
 various mathematical organizations. This is a fact.

     It is hard to gauge whether the job market is better or worse than 
 when I was on the market 2 years ago.   I have heard of people who have 
 had no luck whatsoever in looking for a job, so it's hard to imagine that 
 things are better.

   I think the job market is getting better for those who are not in pure 
 mathematics, but the supply pool is still so bloated that it will be 
 several years before the situation eases up.

    It appears that schools prefer someone who has a Ph.D. in hand, making
 it more difficult for new Ph.D.'s entering the market.  I was lucky. 

   I noticed an effort on the part of many schools to interview and hire 
 earlier in the season than in past years.  (I was in the market in 1992, 
 94, and 95.)  

   Interviews and job offers seemed to go out in three "waves" this year.  
 The first wave occured in February, when many of the larger state 
 universities made their offers.  A second wave occured in late March and 
 early April, when smaller private universities seemed to make their moves.  
 There seemed to be another wave in early May.  This surprised me, I had 
 come to expect that most schools would try to complete their hiring as 
 early as possible. 

   This is the second year that I've received an e-mail mass rejection
 that contains the addresses of everyone being rejected.  

   Some rejection letters I received pointed out that search committees were 
 surprised at the volume of "excellent" applications they received this year.

   I was surprised at the number of schools which sent me letters saying 
 that the funding anticipated for the advertised position was no longer 
 available. Is it common practise to advertise a position when there is 
 uncertainty about its funding?

   I was impressed with the efforts made by several schools to keep their 
 applicants informed as the decision process moved along.  The time that they 
 spent doing that was very much appreciated by those of us who were waiting 
 anxiously.

   Lyon College fills about the equivalent of one full-time math 
 position with two or more part-time MA's teaching College Algebra and 
 (next year) elementary functions, both for college credit.

   I find these statistics very disturbing, especially since those [from 
 my institution] looking in academia had very strong teaching records in
 addition to their research qualifications.

   Here are my (depressing) responses to your survey:

   I am thinking of committing suicide at the Winter joint meeting.
 .......Incidentally, I probably will not commit suicide, but I enjoy 
 thinking about doing it at the Winter joint meeting.  (At one of the 
 really big lectures.)
	
   As I see it, I just wasted half a decade overworking to get a degree
 necessary for the job I wanted, and now can't get.  

   I have received no responses to a flood of applications, and have come
 to terms with the fact that no academic offer will be made.  I shall
 leave academia PERMANENTLY when an industry job crops up.

   Most of the Chinese students who came here [my home institution] for a
 PhD in math 5-7 years ago have gotten masters degrees in computer
 science and seem to be doing quite well getting jobs in industry.

   I taught two years at XXXX State (Big Ten), and as far as I know, the new 
 PhD's from there are doing terribly. Some people may be going into their 3rd 
 year as a lecturer, a position offered to new graduates unable to find 
 employment. 

   I received a tenure-track job offer,  but turned it down since some of
 the faculty there told me I'd never get any research done there.

   Our profession is badly in need of a change in attitude as far as 
 industrial employment and teaching go, and I heartily support the work YMN 
 is doing to raise awareness of these issues. 

   Thanks for taking your time to compile this!!!  It's always good to get
 some information given how frustrating it is looking for jobs.

   Thank you very much for taking the time to put these answers together.  I 
 really benefited from reading the results of last year's survey, and I look 
 forward to seeing this year's.

   Thank you for all the service that you provide to our community.

   Good luck with the survey!!!

   Thanks for all the work you are doing with this!

   Finally, I'd just like to express my appreciation to the YMN Board for 
 getting out the information on the job market, and for providing a forum
 for sharing our experiences in it.  I've found that the job 
 scene has changed so much in the past few years that most established
 mathematicians really have no idea as to how to deal with it.  The 
 Newsletter was an invaluable aid to me in dealing with this difficult
 situation.  Thanks.

   I'm leaving my current jobs for personal reasons (2 body problem), and 
 moving to a sparsely populated state with very few universities or colleges.
 Things look pretty bleak for future academic employment, but my goal
 since beginning graduate school has been academia.

   It is quite possible that I would not have gotten the offer
 that I did if my wife had not already accepted a tenure track offer
 from the same institution.

   It took me three times on the market for a permanent position to land one. 
 In the end, I am very happy about the position I accepted.  

   I feel that I really lucked out [winning an NSERC research grant].

   I guess I could say that hard work has paid off. I'm four years beyond my 
 PhD and every year I've done a little better on the market than the year 
 before. This winter I finally got my first tenure track offer. 

   Since I didn't know if I would be able to finish my PhD research this 
 year I only applied to a couple of jobs, just in case something would 
 work out.  It did!
    I applied only to jobs that I really wanted, since otherwise it would 
 make sense to stay in graduate school for another year.   I focused my job 
 search to the three jobs most appropriate to my math education interests.  
 This worked for me.  I was able to tell the people at my favorite job that
 their position was, indeed, my main choice.  





