
     YMN 1995 Job Survey 

There have been 59 responses to the survey which ran in the last 
issue.    While that number is too small for any really meaningful
conclusions to be drawn, it has yielded some interesting anecdotes
(see other article in this issue), as well as the following hastily
compiled raw data:

59 Respondents; 

Their job status (for next year, as of survey):

23    have tenure track positions
3     have jobs in industry/business
9     have postdoctoral positions
7     have temporary positions
1     has a part time job (offered and accepted in late Feb!)
16    have yet to hear anything

Of those without permanent positions

1     has a three year position
9     have a two year position
6     have one year positions
1     was indeterminant


Hopefully, I will get a flood of additional responses (I think that I
will need around 100 total to say anything meaningful) soon, so that we
can run an article in Concerns with a more detailed report.   I want to
thank all who responded, and ask anyone who has yet to do so to please
send in a survey.   Anyone should feel free to forward copies to their 
friends.   Below is a copy of the survey.


-Frank Sottile
sottile@math.toronto.edu


------------------    Job Survey    -------------------------


Dear readers,
If you could send me email answering the following questions, I would 
appreciate it.  I will try and tabulate results as soon as possible, 
(hopefully by mid June).  To make this easier to tabulate, please 
structure your answers to reflect the order of the questions.


Thank you,
Frank Sottile
sottile@math.toronto.edu

Please respond if you applied for jobs this year.

1.  What is your primary research area? (2-digit MR number, if possible)
    (MR classification numbers may be found in the Year-end index issues
    of mathematical reviews)
2.  How many schools did you apply to?
3.  How many industry/government/other positions did you apply to?
4.  How many on-site interviews did you have?
5.  How many offers did you receive?  (if you received no offers, please
    skip to question 8).
6.  If you received an offer, when was it made?
7.  What kind of position did you accept? (1-year, 2-year, part-time, 
    post-doc, tenure track, industry/business, government, etc.)  
    (try to keep to these categories)
8.  What was your position for 1994-1995?  (same categories as above, 
    plus graduate student)
9.  Please include anything else you feel might be interesting.
    In particular, I would appreciate any comments or feeling you
    have about the job market.

I will compile these anecdotes separately, with the sources and schools 
remaining anonymous
