
 		    YMN 1996 Job Survey 

For each of the past two years Concern's of Young Mathematicians 
has run a late spring survey of the job market, or at least how 
some of our readers have fared in the market.   This may give us 
an early idea on the the state of the job market this year. although 
it is in no way a scientific survey.   We ask that you fill the 
survey which follows if you applied for jobs this year.  I hope 
to compile the results and publish a couple of articles discussing 
the responses.

Of particular interest is information (anecdotal, if necessary) on how
you think that market is shaping up this year, or how others at your 
institution are faring.   

Please feel free to forward this to your friends, the larger the 
response, the more meaningful are our data and conclusions.

Thank you,
Frank Sottile
sottile@math.toronto.edu

Please respond if you applied for jobs this year.

1.  What is your primary research area? (2-digit MR number, if possible)
    (MR classification numbers may be found in the Year-end index issues
    of mathematical reviews)
2.  How many schools did you apply to?
3.  How many industry/government/other positions did you apply to?
4.  How many on-site interviews did you have?
5.  How many offers did you receive?  (if you received no offers, please
    skip to question 8).
6.  If you received an offer, when was it made?
7.  What kind of position did you accept? (1-year, 2-year, part-time, 
    post-doc, tenure track, industry/business, government, etc.)  
    (try to keep to these categories)
8.  What was your position for 1995-1996?  (same categories as above, 
    plus graduate student)
9.  Please include anything else you feel might be interesting.
    In particular, I would appreciate any comments or feeling you
    have about the job market.  For instance, anecdotal information such 
    as "of 6 graduating PhD's from XXXXX, 2 have tenure track positions,
    3 have post-docs, and one is leaving mathematics for a job in finance"
    would be interesting and useful.

I will compile these anecdotes separately, with the sources and schools 
remaining anonymous
