          Anecdotes from the 1996/7 YMN Job Survey

In the YMN job survey, I asked respondents to include any information
that they had on how their colleagues were faring.  Below I have
included these (edited) comments.  To heighten interest, I have roughly
divided the institutions between Group I departments and all others.
Some schools had more than one respondent:


 Funds at AAAA for graduate student support (beyond fourth year) have
been seriously reduced.  This means that both 5th year students and 4th
year students were pushed onto the market at the same time.

Of those who finished from AAAA in 4 years, 1 person is going to
Microsoft, 1 is deciding between his info-tech and finance offers, and
the others have prestigious post-docs.  In my year (5th), I'm doing
computer science stuff, another is going into business analysis, one to
NSA, one to a 1-yr postdoc at the Tata institute, another has no job as
of last week, and two have 2 year postdocs in Canada.

There are at least 18 people leaving AAAA this year.  I think 5 are
going into industry (financial and engineering), 9 have research
oriented post-docs at good places, and 3 have yet to receive any offers.

BBBB is having an excellent year. Of 26 students, only 3 are still
seeking employment, and 11 have non-academic employment. This includes
positions at Morgan-Stanley (financial) and TRW (computing). Of the 12
individuals who found academic jobs, 3 have tenure-track jobs, while 9
have post-doctoral positions.

I have heard there are 26 graduating PhD's from BBBB this year but could
only recall 18.  I know 5 leaving academia for jobs in industry, 2
looking exclusively in academia without offers so far, and 11 with
academic jobs (at least 2 of these are definitely tenure track and at
least 6 are definitely postdocs, not sure about the others).

Here at BBBB the situation is as follows: Of the 24 people I know to be
finishing, 19 have jobs and two more have not begun job applications.
Of the 19 jobs, 11 are academic (3 tenure-track, 6 2yr, 1 NSF, 1 IAS), 7
are industrial (1 financial, 1 engineering, 5 computer-related), and one
is governmental.

Of the four post-docs at CCCC, one has a tenure-track position.  One
went to industry, one ended up there after a long search for academic
positions (rejected one academic offer based on two-body problem).  I
have a position in academic computing.

Among the graduate students, things aren't so rosy.  Of five applicants
that I am aware of, one was offered a position at a school I've never
heard of.  Two were still on the market last I heard.  One got a nice
position at a four year college, one will be returning to his native
country (I think) to work at an academic job there.

I don't know everyone at DDDD  who is on the market, but here
is what I do know:

Postdocs:
One has a series of research-only postdocs in Europe
One is still looking
One I have not heard from for quite a while
One is geographically limited and is seriously considering industry
Two applied to 1 to 3 "dream schools", one had an interview but no
   offer, both had time left on their positions here
   
Graduate students: (There are probably many more that I do not know)
One has a postdoc in the US
One (US citizen) has an appointment in the Middle-East. I am not sure
of the type of appointment

Of 8 graduating Ph.D.s in pure math at EEEE, 6 have post-docs, 1 has a
computer job, and 1 is still looking.

In applied math at FFFF are 4 graduating PhD's: One has an industrial
position, two have postdocs, and one is still looking

The market seemed to ease up locally, as GGGG had six of seven 
getting very good offers early.  The seventh is still looking both in 
academics and industry.

Elsewhere I've heard of tough times continuing - Princeton only placing 
half of their class as of a month ago, Harvard eight of eleven with only 
one early offer.

At HHHH, there are 7 students graduating, one has a tenure track
position, two have post docs, two may become actuaries (unless
an academic position turns up), and two are waiting to hear from the NSA
(or other non-academic positions).

A total of 16 people at IIII (10 pure math, 5 applied math, 1 statistics) will
graduate by Summer of 1997.  Of these, 2 have tenure-track positions at
small schools, 9 have post-docs, 1 has a position at a government lab, 1
is going into industry, and 3 don't know yet.

   Nobody from JJJJ has an academic position, besides NSERC postdocs.
At least 6 were looking, but at least 8 will graduate by Summer.



Group II+

At KKKK, there are 3 graduating PhDs, I have a tenure track position,
one is leaving academia for a computer-related job, the other could have
stayed in academia but opted for a highly paid position in industry.
One person who graduated last year still hasn't found anything.

  Of 7 graduating PhDs from LLLL, 3 have tenure-track positions, 2
have 2-year post-docs, 1 has a 2-year temporary position, and 1 is not
graduating because he has no job.

  Of 7 students graduating from LLLL, 6 have accepted positions. There
are stong indications that experience in teaching a variety of courses
for which we had all or a lot of responsibility was a large factor for 5
of the 6 of us. Four positions are teaching oriented (3 of them
tenure-track, 1 temporary), one is both teaching and research
(temporary), one is an NSF post-doc.

Of the 9 people at MMMM looking for jobs:
	1 has taken a tenure track position
	1 has a post-doc in Hong Kong
	2 have taken jobs in industry
	1 has decided to delay graduation for another year.
	4 are unknown

  Last year, several very qualified grad students from NNNN had extreme
trouble finding positions.  This year, all but one person (who I am not
sure is applying) has found a good job.  At least 3 have multiple year
postdocs; 2 found tenure-track positions at smaller teaching schools;
and one has a position with the NSA.  Several people were choosing from
fairly attractive offers--postdoc and tenure track.

    I graduated in 1995 from OOOO. Of those I graduated with, one has a
job in industry because he couldn't get a job in academia, one has had a
temporary position for 2 years with hopes of it turning into a tenure
track, one is unknown to me and I have a temporary position.

Here at PPPP, there is one who is ABD, one with a tenure track job at a
four-year art school (only applied to art schools), one person who
graduated last year has a tenure track job at a small four year college.
one person who opted to go for two masters degrees (math and comp sci)
instead of the Phd, even though he passed his qualifiers several years
ago, and has a job in industry (I don't know where all he applied)
one person graduating this year who applied at over a hundred schools,
got three phone interviews, two interviews, and finally was offered a
one-year visiting position at a small college in Pennsylvania.
one person graduating this year who is probably going to stay here in a
visiting position next year.

Of 4 post-docs (besides me) who began here at QQQQ 2 years ago, 1 took a
tenure track job in Canada last year but stayed here this year, 2
took tenure track jobs somewhat comparable to mine, and 1 is
returning to Greece by choice. 

I spoke with someone at a recent conference who told be that only 1
out of their 10 new PhD's at RRRR had a job. 