Comments from the 1996/7 YMN job survey

In the YMN job survey, I asked people for their comments on their
experiences on the job market, or anything else they wanted to say.
I have their slightly edited responses:

First, the original version of the survey included the flippant phrase:
     "leaving mathematics for a job in finance"
This elicited several responses:

 I don't necessarily feel that I've "left mathematics" for finance.

 I don't want to critize, but this is not the best way to phrase this. Say 
 "leaving academia". There is plenty of math done on Wall Street, just 
 most of us don't find it interesting. 

Actually, I do find the mathematics invloved in finance intersting, the
basic model used is quite elegant, but that is another story.  Also
previous surveys joked about leaving mathematics for divinity school,
but that was dropped after one respondent did just that.

Here is some analysis:

 I was told the following encouraging story by a few folks at the
 college where I took the job:

 For some years now, many colleges have been cutting back by replacing
 retiring people with temporary positions.  This was due to a short
 supply of 18 year olds.  Apparently, the demographics now show that
 the famine is over and colleges are beginning to replace temporary
 positions with tenure track ones.  Perhaps this is the beginning of
 the end of the job crunch.

And testimonials:

 Just a word of hope for people out there. After almost 6 years on and
 off the job market, I finally have a tenure track position. The
 institution where I held a definite term position came through with a
 tenure track offer when it was became clear I was earnestly looking for
 a tenure track job elsewhere. (Asking the chair for 39 letters of
 reference probably helped drive that home.)


 The current trend (for the lucky) seems to be: grad school -- temporary
 appointment --tenure track appointment.  Of course, people like me (with
 tons of experience) steal some good positions from new PhDs.


 I have quite a bit of experience with alternative forms of instruction
 (including cooporative learning and using technology in the classroom).
 It was clear to me that this was the major factor in my job offers.


 I focus on applications to biology.  The inter-disciplinary nature of my
 work seemed to usually help in the job search.

 
 Spending a year of graduate school at a different institution helped in
 finding a job.


 I believe part of the reason XXXX's students are doing so well is that
 many people prepared for non-academic careers during the last two years.


 The post doc offer I received came from people who knew me and my work
 well, they made their decision without looking at my application package
 and recommendations.


On my side was the breadth of my interests:  my thesis research is in an
interdisciplinary applied area of math (population biology), involving
dynamical systems (a buzzword of the day), and I also have a considerable
amount of experience (and schooling) in math education, which is also 
a hot topic these days.


  The people I know of who were looking for jobs in industry this
year all got offers with just three or four applications.


If your advisor is too busy or you try 
to take matters into your own hands, it's tough to get academic or government
research institutions to look at you.



This person landed a tenure track position after a string of SIX
ONE-YEAR positions:

 The job market seems to be a bit better this year.  But it still sucks.  

Here are some general comments about the job market:

 I do think the market is better than when I previously was in it two
 years ago, but not as good as I would like to see it.


 My impression was that the industrial job market was pretty good for
 computational mathematicians, but it seemed to be a tough year for those
 interested in academia.


 I feel that the market is improving; also there are far more multiple 
 position ads than in previous years.  


 I have heard many claim the "market is getting better" but I do not share 
 their optimism.  This is primiary my feeling about the academic scene.  
 The industrial market is a bit better but a mathematican still has to 
 work to impress a recruiter.  


 Several people here were choosing from attractive offers: postdoc and
 tenure track.  From my limited perspective, things are looking brighter.
 

 Clearly the job market still sucks.  Aside from applying to a few
 jobs, I was involved in 4 searches here at UUUU.  We have signed 3
 tenure track assistant professors, and all 3 are coming off 3-year
 postdocs.  We are also currently interviewing for a 1-year position,
 and the quality of candidates still looking at this late date is
 alarming.  We had 2 one-year people here at UUUU searching for tenure
 track positions, and both (so far) have struck out.


 I think the market is better this year than last, though it is still
 tough, and in order to have a good shot, you need a lot on your side.


 I have no idea if the market is better.  I searched the 3 previous
 years with pretty bad luck - no good tenure track offers.  I did not
 expect to get any offers this year, but I guess my vita improved
 enough: number of publications went from 2 to 4.


 People seem to be having an easy time finding jobs in industry,
 especially with newly developing computer companies.  Jobs in academia,
 of course, are harder to come by.


 I really think that the market is getting better.  I thought there were
 more jobs this year than there were last year.


 Two things of interest.  First, all the faculty I met said the job market
 was getting better. In addition, many places reported drops of 10-30%
 in their applicant pool.


 I think the market has softened somewhat, at least in terms on sheer
 numbers of applicants. Many of the places I received rejection letters
 from indicated pools of 150 - 200, but some even less.


 One thing I have noticed is that I know people with great research and
 people with great teaching who are still looking. The ones with both
 good research and good teaching seem to be fairing the best. This is a
 bit different than what I saw two years ago when teaching credentials
 seemed to be the focal point for many schools.


 I find the incessant whining about the job market to be irritating.  In
 my field, people basically got jobs commensurate with their ability, by
 and large. The main exceptions to this rule are the Chinese, who are
 probably being discriminated against on the basis that they "can't speak
 English well", whether or not the allegation is true (often, it
 isn't). (They also tend not to be the ones complaining.)

Here is a note from a Chinese mathematician, about other Chinese:

 I know some Ph.D.'s doing math in other universities but they have all
 switched to other things.  A guy from Berkeley (doing the height problem
 in elliptic curves) has got a job in a computer company. Many others
 have already switch to other things years ago though they are still
 technically in Mathematics departments.  They graduate when they feel
 they have enough preparation to get a job in industry.  I know a guy in
 statistics is working in some company but he should graduate one year
 ago. He told me he did not bother to get the Ph.D. so quick.
 

Here are some personal stories:

 My wife is a grad student at Cornell, and it would have been almost
 impossible to get an academic job anywhere near there. We had no wish to
 be separated any longer, and I did not have a burning desire to continue
 in academic research mathematics. So I applied to nearby industrial
 positions. In fact, I only applied to 1 job in Ithaca (the rest were
 30-100 miles away) and I got it.


 I only applied to one position because I had a year left where I am but
 the only one school nearby that could be a realistic solution to my
 two-body problem.  I'm rather ecstatic at the moment about actually
 getting the job, and still a bit amazed.  


 It was a tough decision to turn MSRI down, but an uncertain future in 
 academia doesn't compare well against a much higher salary in finance.



I should add that I started taking actuarial exams last Novemember and I
don't know how much longer I will wait before starting to apply for
actuarial jobs.



I had 4 interviews, the other three of which were at small liberal-arts 
institutions. At two of the three schools, I'm pretty sure I didn't get 
the job because the dean didn't like me.



I have about 30 rejections and about 5 places where I've heard through 
the grapevine that I am no longer under consideration but don't have
an official rejection letter; one place indicated that I would not
receive a rejection letter.  I haven't had any feedback at all other 
than acknowledgements and rejections (neither has my friend without an
offer).  I wish more places would make the status of their search
available online (such as the bottom of MSU's page:
http://www.mth.msu.edu/Hiring/current_ad.html ).  This would let everyone
know what was going on without swamping limited secretarial resources.
Actually, what would be even better would be to have a central
position status site, similar to the job seekers page, listing positions
by institution with the timestamped status of each position.  


					
								
Receiving this offer in January was a major pain as it meant that most of
the interested American Universities were not far enough through their
reviewing process to know if they wanted to make a counter offer.


    The two schools that made me an offer had both had job searches two
years ago, and in both cases their first choice candidate turned them
down after waiting a couple weeks.  As a result, they sped up their
application process this year.  It worked out well for me, because I was
very happy with the offer I accepted and it was nice to know early on,
but it seems a disturbing trend that some schools move so much faster
than others.  Offhand, it *seemed* like the schools that were more
teaching than research made offers first, with the schools that were
more research oriented moving slower.




XXXX was early in making offers, so I called around to the other places
I had applied.  About half were able to tell me "you didn't make
our short list" (so I wondered why they couldn't have let me know
that sooner!).  Some seemed completely caught off-guard, having not
considered their applicants at all by the end of January.



I am not overly pleased with my present position, even though I was
lucky to get it, 3 years ago this month.  That was the year that I
graduated, and I had sent out 200 applications, and my first interview
was here at YYYY.  The next year I sent out about 50, and got nothing,
not even an interview. The following year, this year, 1997, I only sent
out for 8 academic positions, and 5 non- academic positions, and I
haven't heard anything positive, but I have gotten 3 rejections, which
is what I expected.  My wife and I have bought a house, because we are
tired of waiting, and I think that I have accepted my situation, despite
wanting a better job. I just don't see it coming in the near future, and
how long am I going to wait?




Both of the offers I got were due to my experience and research related
to computer science.  One was a permanent research-programming staff
position at a major, top-ranked research institution.  The other was a
two year (to be reopened as tenure track after two years) teaching
position at a small exclusive liberal arts college.  Since the latter
was a position I have dreamt about for so long, I couldn't pass it up
despite the exciting prospect of working at a major research
institution.





My field did quite well, with people getting post-docs at MIT, Brown,
Johns Hopkins, Virginia, Michigan and U Wisconsin.  This is quite a
turn-around from last year I hear when I heard of only one postdoc in
algebraic topology.  So my final analysis is that I was fortunate to be
a member of two lucky (for this year) subsets of the market: ZZZZ grads
and algebraic topologists.  Both of these subsets have had trouble in
the past, so it was nice to see it turn around this year.



 No stories to tell, other than that the number of interviews I
received was quite disappointingly small. 


Initially I had a lot of interest in San Diego, but only one place
actually materialized into an interview.  I am in fact quite pleased
with the position and feel it suits me well, but also felt extremely
worried for quite some time and wondered whether I could have changed
something in my reaction to the short list notifications to have
influenced the outcome more.  My overall impression in San Diego was
that the market was improving somewhat, but based on my own experience
and that of the two other post-docs in similar positions, I'm not so
sure.  None of us had very much choice in the end, although we are all
employed for next year.  The job seekers list and various anecdotes
makes it clear there are still many good mathematicians without jobs,
which would seem to indicate it is still pretty bad, although this is
the first year such a list even existed so it is hard to compare.


I feel strongly that many US citizens get their PhD without being ready
to compete with people from other countries getting their PhDs at the
same time.  I am convinced that this was the case for me.  In
particular, somehow for the first three years after my 1991 PhD I
managed to remain ignorant of the importance of publishing rapidly, and
the ways to go about doing so, although perhaps most of this was due to
stupidity on my part.  But I only spent 4 years in grad school, and I
just did not have a broad enough mathematical base to compete well when
I got out.  I was also lulled to complacency by early success: an NSF
postdoc fellowship and a Moore Instructorship at MIT.  These mean little
when set against a short vita, of course.  Indeed, I think they hurt at
teaching schools.  The people at SSSS wrote very thoughtful teaching
letters, which were crucial in my getting the first two offers above.


I am a citizen of Germany I received 3 interviews (plus two more
possibilites after I accepted my position).  My first interview was the
least desirable position.  My last interview was the most desirable
position.  In the end it worked out well for me, but because of this I
might have been forced to accept a less desirable position.


  I took a part time position last year; my advisor said I should have
stayed an extra year as a graduate student, but I had been hopeful I
would get a job over the summer (one offer, for an impossibly high
teaching load and absolutely no job security at a business school where
all faculty have one-year appointments; I turned this down).  Thus, I
was free to take a position mid-year, where I am now.  It was presumed
(but not guaranteed by any means) that I would be renewed for another
year.  That was the only offer I got as of April, so I took it.



I will continue doing mathematics for the next year withour thinking
anything else. However if I can not get anything until next May, I will
start thinking switch to something else like computer sciences. But, I
claim I am still "loyal" to mathematics now. 




The interviews in San Diego seems to function as a meat market. 


I am an applied mathematican.  I think if you are pure mathematican you
are in big trouble if you can't get an academic job.  Software places
will always hire you but my industrial interviewing experience is that
pure math people not not wanted in industry.

I didn't mean to sound too despondant about the academic job market.  I'm 
glad to get the job I did.  But an academic career was what I always had 
in mind and it's hard to let that go.  Perhaps I should have mentioned in 
my survey that I didn't have any publications yet.  That's not unusual 
for our department but it sure hurts the academic job search.  When I get 
done in a few months, I'll have enough to write a few papers on.


I know of one frustrating instance of a qualified woman leaving academia
for industry, by choice. I don't know if this is a general trend. 



    I concentrated my applications geographically (10 of 36 were in
Texas).  I had some interviews at the Joint Meetings, and things seemed
to get going with some schools right after that, while others waited
until April, with no real distinction between types of schools who
waited and types who didn't (for me).  My double-disciplinary approach,
I think, got my foot in the door at a number of places; on the other
hand, the fact that I have no publications undoubtedly hurt me a lot at
others.  I think that my being from Texas helped my application at the
Texas schools; indeed, my being from the Dallas area seemed to come as a
delightful surprise to the folks at the Dallas-area institution where I
ended up accepting an offer.






I got to see both sides of the application process this year since my
present (soon to be former) institution was also hiring.  Since everyone
in our department helped with the screening process I had the
opportunity to read a number of applications.  It doesn't take too long
to distinguish a well-prepared application from a poorly-prepared
application.  Is it any coincidence that most, if not all, of the people
who made our short list had well-prepared materials??  Who knows.
However, it's hard to make a good impression when you have a cover
letter which is either: (A) addressed to "Dear Sir" (our department
chair is a woman and her name was included in the advertisement); (B)
obviously photo-copied, but "tailored" because the applicant took five
seconds to write "Dear Dr. Blank" in pen; (C) about two lines long; (D)
addressed to the wrong school.


Person A:
  Anecdotally, the women here seemed to get more inquiries (and earlier)
on fewer applications sent; they were really competitive candidates, so
maybe it wasn't gender related.  Men and women with inside connections
seemed to get want they wanted on an equal basis.
 
  I feel as A does, but it should probably be best kept quite, that it
was definitely a females' market and once they all had jobs, then they
extended their search to include males.  It was also to my advantage
that I had a year of high school teaching experience with a secondary
education certificate.



On the other hand, thanks a lot for organizing this survey. I understand
the amount of work it takes and I definitely appreciate it.



Thanks for doing this!


	Thank you for compiling this important information. 


I am glad that you are doing this survey.  Though the AMS keeps careful
tabs on recent doctorates, there are no comparable surveys on people
trying to make the transition from postdocs to tenure track positions.
If one did, I think the 10% unemployment figure one sees for new
doctorates would be echoed for those trying to make that transition.



   Suggestion: It might be interesting to add to this survey the
question of how long after Ph.D.  Some places I've talked to look for
fresh Ph.D.'s while others are looking for people with several years of
research, teaching and grant writing experience.  What is the general
trend?  How does it divide among the various types of institutions.

