Appeared Concerns of Young Mathematicians, 23 April 1997.  
                   Volume 5, Issue 11

 		   1997 YMN Job Survey 

For each of the past three years, Concern's of Young Mathematicians has
run a late spring survey of the job market, or at least how some of our
readers have fared in the market.  This may give us an early idea on the
the state of the job market this year, although it is in no way a
scientific survey.  If you applied for jobs this year, we ask that you
fill the survey which follows.  I hope to compile the results and
publish a couple of articles discussing the responses.

Of particular interest is information (anecdotal, if necessary) on how
you think that market is shaping up this year, or how others at your
institution are faring.

Please feel free to forward this to your friends, the larger the
response, the more meaningful are our data and conclusions.

Thank you,
Frank Sottile
sottile@msri.org

Please respond if you applied for jobs this year.

1.  What is your primary research area? (2-digit MR number, if possible)
    (MR classification numbers may be found in the Year-end index issues
    of mathematical reviews, or on mathsci.)
2.  How many academic institutions did you apply to?
3.  How many industry/government/other positions did you apply to?
4.  How many offers did you receive?  (if you received no offers, please
    skip to question 8).
5.  If you received an offer, when was it made?
6.  What kind of position did you accept? 
    Try to keep to the following categories:
     tenure track		private sector   
     government			part-time (or adjunct)
     post-doc (any research-oriented temporary positon, eg Gibbs lecturer)
     temporary (other temporary position)
      If temporary or post doc, please indicate duration.
7.  What was your position for 1996-1997?  (same categories as above, 
    plus graduate student, indicate institution, if you would like)
8.  Please include anything else you feel might be interesting.
    In particular, I would appreciate any comments or feelings you
    have about the job market.  Also, anecdotal information such 
    as "of 6 graduating PhD's from XXXXX, 2 have tenure track positions,
    3 have post-docs, and one is leaving academia for a job in finance",
    would be interesting and useful.

All responses will be kept strictly confidential.
I will compile these anecdotes separately, with the sources and schools 
remaining anonymous

